docs/installation.rst, before:

Installation Guide
=================

This page lists quick, copyable steps to set up the project locally on
Windows (PowerShell) and Unix (bash). It focuses on Python-level
installation; external tools (Astrometry.net, SCAMP) are optional for
advanced features.

Minimum requirements
--------------------

- Python 3.12 (exactly) - required for verified dependency compatibility
- pip (latest version recommended)
- 2-3 GB free disk space (more recommended for large image sets and temporary processing files)

Quick install (PowerShell)
-------------------------

.. code-block:: powershell

   git clone https://github.com/your-repo/rpp.git
   cd rpp
   python -m venv .venv
   .\.venv\Scripts\Activate.ps1
   pip install -e .

Quick install (bash)
--------------------

.. code-block:: bash

   git clone https://github.com/your-repo/rpp.git
   cd rpp
   python3 -m venv .venv
   source .venv/bin/activate
   pip install -e .

Optional external tools
-----------------------

- Astrometry.net: required for blind plate solving (solve-field). Install
  via package manager or from source and ensure `solve-field` is on PATH.
- SCAMP: optional, for astrometric refinement.

Environment variables
---------------------

Set SMTP credentials if you want the app to send emails (password can be
base64-encoded in `SMTP_PASS_ENCODED`):

.. code-block:: powershell

   $env:SMTP_SERVER = 'smtp.gmail.com'
   $env:SMTP_PORT = '587'
   $env:SMTP_USER = 'you@example.com'
   $env:SMTP_PASS_ENCODED = [Convert]::ToBase64String([Text.Encoding]::UTF8.GetBytes('your-app-password'))

Verification
------------

After installation, verify Python dependencies and start the app:

.. code-block:: powershell

   python -c "import streamlit, astropy; print('OK')"
   python backend.py
   streamlit run frontend.py

If you plan to use plate solving, verify `solve-field --help` works and
download index files appropriate for your typical field scale.

Support
-------

- See :doc:`usage` and :doc:`examples` for simple run instructions and a
  minimal Python example.
- For Astrometry.net and SCAMP installation follow their project pages.

Commit message:

Implement FastAPI backend for RAPAS Photometry Pipeline
- Initialize FastAPI application structure with main entry point.
- Add runtime configuration management for environment-specific settings.
- Set up SQLAlchemy database connection and session management.
- Define ORM models for users, FITS files, and analysis jobs.
- Create Pydantic schemas for request and response validation.
- Implement user authentication and password recovery mechanisms.
- Develop endpoints for user registration, login, and configuration management.
- Add file upload functionality for FITS files with metadata storage.
- Implement health check endpoint for service availability.
- Create client utilities for interacting with the FastAPI backend.
- Migrate legacy SQLite database to the new SQLAlchemy schema.

docs/installation.rst, after:


Installation Guide
==================

This page lists quick, copyable steps to set up the project locally on Windows (PowerShell) and Unix (bash). It covers both FastAPI (recommended) and legacy backend options. External tools (Astrometry.net, SCAMP) are optional for advanced features.


Minimum Requirements
--------------------

- Python 3.12 (exactly) - required for verified dependency compatibility
- pip (latest version recommended)
- 2-3 GB free disk space (more recommended for large image sets and temporary processing files)


Quick Install (PowerShell)
-------------------------

.. code-block:: powershell

   git clone https://github.com/your-repo/rpp.git
   cd rpp
   python -m venv .venv
   .\.venv\Scripts\Activate.ps1
   pip install -e .

Quick Install (bash)
--------------------

.. code-block:: bash

   git clone https://github.com/your-repo/rpp.git
   cd rpp
   python3 -m venv .venv
   source .venv/bin/activate
   pip install -e .


Optional External Tools
----------------------

- Astrometry.net: required for blind plate solving (solve-field). Install via package manager or from source and ensure `solve-field` is on PATH.
- SCAMP: optional, for astrometric refinement.


Environment Variables
---------------------

Set SMTP credentials if you want the app to send emails (password can be base64-encoded in `SMTP_PASS_ENCODED`):

.. code-block:: powershell

   $env:SMTP_SERVER = 'smtp.gmail.com'
   $env:SMTP_PORT = '587'
   $env:SMTP_USER = 'you@example.com'
   $env:SMTP_PASS_ENCODED = [Convert]::ToBase64String([Text.Encoding]::UTF8.GetBytes('your-app-password'))


Verification
------------

After installation, verify Python dependencies and start the app:

.. code-block:: powershell

   python -c "import streamlit, astropy; print('OK')"

   # Start backend (choose one):
   python -m uvicorn api.main:app --reload --host 127.0.0.1 --port 8000
   # or legacy:
   python backend.py

   # Start frontend:
   streamlit run frontend.py

If you plan to use plate solving, verify `solve-field --help` works and download index files appropriate for your typical field scale.


Support
-------

- See :doc:`usage` and :doc:`examples` for simple run instructions and a minimal Python example.
- For Astrometry.net and SCAMP installation follow their project pages.
